Pamphlet for conflict resolution (#3)
nlesc-sigs/soft-skills: docs/conflict_resolution/conflict_first_aid.md

> Disclaimer: It is difficult to give concrete action points for every possibility and to define accurately how "good" or "bad" a certain action is without the exact context, e.g. a friend saying "fuck you" while smiling is not the same as your project leader shouting "fuck you" at you. As a rule of thumb, if some interaction leaves a personal negative feeling in you, please act on it.

## Scientific Integrity or social conflict?

First question to answer. If your conflict is about the ownership of a software or publication, about data bias, falsification or plagiarism, please contact ​​[Jisk Attema](mailto:j.attema@esciencecenter.nl) (j.attema@esciencecenter.nl), our internal counsellor for scientific integrity issues. Jisk will help you to align your actions with the 
[Code of conduct for Academic Practice](https://nlesc.sharepoint.com/qi/Shared%20Documents/HC/The%20Netherlands%20Code%20of%20Conduct%20for%20Academic%20Practice%202004%20(version%202014).pdf) that the eScience Center follows. 

If your conflict is not a Scientific Integrity issue, please, keep reading. 

> ## Did you suffer or witness an act of sexism, racism, violence, intimidation, sexual harassment or bullying?

Author: Yeah that part I am very much struggling with. I do not know which guidelines to give, because these topics range from the very subtle misunderstanding to a criminal offence. And the advice would differ widly in my opinion. Do you have a suggestion?

The external counselor is really helpful thanks.

> ## Did you suffer or witness an act of sexism, racism, violence, intimidation, sexual harassment or bullying?

Author: My impression in general is that addressing conflicts at all is a much bigger problem than people overescalating conflicts. But I have no idea if that is true or not at the eScienceCenter. 

So we intentionally left the overescalation part out a bit to not trigger this fear of "Ohh, if I say something people think I am overreacting...". We added a paragraph about consequences of actions. 

My hope would be that if someone overescalates a conflict, the higher levels would appropriately deescalate it again.

We are very sorry that happened to you. We urge you to contact our external counsellor of the Arbo Unie, [Aster Luijendijk](mailto:aster.luijendijk@arbounie.nl) (aster.luijendijk@arbounie.nl). She will support you with her wide experience as external trustee. You can also reach her by phone: 06 52 502 378. If she is not available, don't hesitate and  contact the [Arbo Unie](mailto:vertrouwenspersoon@arbounie.nl) by phone: 088 272 6026 or via e-mail: vertrouwenspersoon@arbounie.nl, they will put you in touch with another counsellor. 

## If your conflict is none of the above, can you rank it?

Conflicts can escalate to varying degrees. It can be comment of a good friend, which does not annoy you but leaves a weird feeling in your gut to you waiting in a dark alley with a shovel. While the conflict is pretty obvious to notice in the latter case, less intense conflicts are harder to detect but easier to fix. Various models to classify a conflict exists, but they all describe certain levels of escalation. Here we use [Friedrich Glasl model of conflict escalation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friedrich_Glasl%27s_model_of_conflict_escalation). Can you identify the stage you are at?

> ![Alt text](./images/9-stages.svg)

Author: I deleted the image, because the wiki article is much better. Link is in the text. Do you have something more in mind? I am not sure how much to push this as a model. My main motivation was to help people realize how far conflicts often have already escalated. I am not sure if we want it to be an official model. I am no expert on this.

- Address conflicts early, do not let it simmer for weeks.
- Try to do it without other people around, as social pressures can make it worse.
- Assume a misunderstanding and not evil intent. 
- Describe the situation of what happened.
- Describe your interpretation of what happened and how it made you feel. 

In general if you feel like "I will tell her/him!" or "Payback time!" you are probably not in the right mood for  addressing the conflict. Most conflicts arise of misunderstandings or misinterpretations and not because people are out to hurt you, but even if people hurt you by accident it has to be addressed. So the art of addressing conflicts in an effective way is called "Non-violent communication" or NVC. If you want to use it to address a conflict [this](http://www.nvccommunicator.com/) is a really good start. Furthermore, the [Social-Skill SIG](https://github.com/nlesc-sigs/soft-skills) lead by Willem and Pablo offers monthly sessions, where we practice conflict resolution techniques. Come by or just talk to them or "ask for a friend". 

### Is the conflict with your manager?

> Yes, this is difficult. Depending on what level of escalation you have (<=3) talking to him using NVC might be helpful. If this does not work the work council (OR) will help you with further steps. Do not worry this has happened before and we want this to be resolved well for everybody.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yes, this is difficult. Depending on what stage of escalation the conflict is (<=3) talking to him using NVC might be helpful. If this does not work, follow the steps of the pre-complaint protocol (link to the OR document to be added) to involve help from a third party. Do not worry, this has happened before and we want this to be resolved well for everybody.
```

### I do not know if my conflict is bad enough to talk to my manager? 

> Yeah, nobody can truly give you a good answer for that. Observe if it happens repeatedly and how you feel afterwards. If something insults you address it using NVC. We come from different countries, cultures and backgrounds so certain things might just be unusual. Still, if it hurts you, bring it up. You are an important part of the organisation and we want you to be happy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yeah, nobody can truly give you a good answer for that. Observe if it happens repeatedly and how you feel afterwards. If something insults you address it using NVC. We come from different countries, cultures and backgrounds so certain things might just be unusual. Still, if it hurts you, bring it up. You are an important part of the organisation and we want you to be happy.  Remember that it is the job of your line manager to help you with work-related problems, so if you experience a situation as a problem you should feel safe to bring it up.
```

Reviewer: I'd like to make sure people feel safe talking to their line manager. Of course this also requires a bit of knowledge of conflict resolution from the manager.

Author: yes, we have to align this with the managers.

### I feel uncomfortable making the step you recommend.

Yes, do not worry. You already identified that there is a conflict. Most importantly speak to someone about it. It can be a friend or relative. Once you are ready, find the right person at the eScience center to talk to.
TODO: Fear about consequences

### My colleague has a conflict and I do not know how to help?

> Being involved in a conflict can result in a sense of helplessness or shame, because we still have this image of the lone hero who fights their own battles. Pointing to this document is a good start. Sharing stories about your own conflicts might also help to show that: a) conflicts happen at the eScience Center b) asking for help and not fighting it out alone is the hero way. 

Reviewer: Can we add something here about preventing polarization? If I'm asked for help, ideally I would play a mediating role and not blindly take my friends side (although I would take their issue seriously). Maybe again point to NVC here, or some resources on how to act as a mediator?

Author: I am sort of split on the issue for the following reason:

I can completely emphasize with the need as friend/colleague to resolve a conflict by arbitration

a) Mediating without an official role is hard, because not necessarily both parties acknowledge you as a mediator, especially if a colleague who trusts you comes to you.
b) I feel we have enough mediating parties in the flowchart already.
c) Most importantly in my experience addressing a conflict openly is hard, and friends/colleagues in my mind should be more support to bring a conflict to the surface.

Reviewer: That's a good point, when you ask a colleague for help it's usually for moral support and not for mediation per se. I like the way you phrased it now.

## Flowchart conflict resolution

Conflicts, especially when you do not know a way out or you feel you are losing are disorienting. So here is a small flowchart for the quick help. Your initiative in 95% of all conflicts should bring you to "Talk to your manager", as they will help you resolve or escalate the conflict. The work council (OR), the directors team, the external counsellor and your colleagues will also be there. You are not alone.

> ![Alt text](./images/conflict_resolution.svg)

Reviewer: I think it very helpful to have this flow chart. However, it lays out a procedure and is therefore a bit more 'official' than the guidelines on conflict resolution. Thus, I think it should be aligned (maybe even be merged) with the OR pre-complaint document (still WIP) and approved by the DT.

A few thoughts:
- What is the difference between an informal conversation and a formal conversation?
- Between'talk to your manager' and 'formal written complaint' there can be a few more steps. The steps we mentione in the pre-complaint procedure are
  - have a talk with the other party together with your line manager
  - have a talk (together with your line manger) with the other parties line manager
- If the problem is your line manager, you can talk to your line managers manager.
- In any of these conversations, you may ask a colleague to join the converstaion for moral support

As for mentioning the OR: I would leave it out of this diagram. The OR should be involved when the conflict might be a symptom of a collective problem in the organization. This could be added as a separate paragraph to this document.

Author: Yes, I completely agree with everything.

I have no experience concerning the OR, but if the OR has been approached before because of conflicts, you have a role either officially or unofficially. I personally can see the appeal of talking to the OR because it is outside the hierachy and the are sort of "on your side".
